---
title: "Gitsplorer"
date: 2019-10-20T16:49:02+02:00
draft: false
---

Have you ever found yourself using Git and thinking "This is great, but I wish
these filesystem operations were read-only and ten times slower?". Well, friend,
do I have news for you.

I was thinking about a project the other that involved comparing the public API
of a Golang codebase at different times in its history. To do this, I figured
I'd clone the repo, check out commit A and analyze it, then check out commit B
and analyze that, and boo! Hiss! That's inelegant and leaves clutter that needs
to be cleaned up all around the disk. There has got to be a better way!

Once I made a https://github.com/gunnihinn/git-commit-mine[Git commit hash
miner] because I wanted to race it against a coworker to see who could get a
commit with more leading zeros into a frequently used repository at work. That
had the side effect of teaching me some about Git's internals, like what its
objects are (blobs, trees, commits, tags) and how they fit together. I figured
that if I could convince the Golang AST parser to read the Git database instead
of the filesystem, I could do what I wanted in a much better way.

Alas, doing that would have required monkey-patching the Go standard library,
and I don't want to hunt down every system call it ends up making to be sure I
got them all. However, Git is famously a content-addressable filesystem, so what
if we just made a filesystem that points to a given commit in a repo and pointed
the parser at that?

This turns out to be pretty easy to do by combining `libgit2` and `libfuse`. We
use the former to read objects in the Git repository. (The objects are easy to
read by hand, until you have to read packed objects. That's doable, but a bit
of a distraction in what is already quite the distraction.) We then use the
latter to create a very basic read-only filesystem. In the end, we have a
read-only version of `git checkout` that writes nothing to disk.

I put a prototype of this together in Python, because I'm lazy. It's called
https://github.com/gunnihinn/gitsplorer/[`gitsplorer`] and you should absolutely
not use it anywhere near a production system. It scratches my itch pretty well,
though. In addition to my API comparisons (which I still haven't got to), I do
sometimes want to poke around the state of a repository at a given commit and
this saves me doing a stash-checkout dance or reading the `git worktree` manpage
again.

For fun, and to see how bad of an idea this was, I came up with a very
unscientific benchmark: We checkout the Linux kernel repository at a randomly
selected
https://github.com/torvalds/linux/commit/29c7f1f53bfb3770bdb65a9e79064a963dd40621[commit],
run Boyter's https://github.com/boyter/scc[scc] line-counting tool, and checkout
`master` again. We do this both with `gitsplorer` and with ye olde `git
checkout`. The results speak for themselves:

____
git checkout: 62 seconds
gitsplorer: 567 seconds
____

The `gitsplorer` version is also remarkable for spending all its time using 100%
of a CPU, which the `git` version does not. (It uses around 90% of a CPU while
doing the checkouts, then all of my CPUs while counting lines. The Python FUSE
filesystem is single-threaded, so beyond Python being slow it must also be a
point of congestion for the line counting.) I did some basic profiling of this
with the wonderful profiler https://github.com/P403n1x87/austin[Austin], and saw
that the Python process spends most of its time reading Git blobs. I think, but
did not verify, that this is because `libgit2` decompresses the contents of the
blobs on every such call, while most of the reads we make are in the FUSE
`getattr` call where we are only interested in metadata about the blob. I made
no attempts to optimize any of this.

So, friends, if you've ever wished `git checkout` was read-only and 10 times
slower than it is, today is your lucky day.
