---
title: "The standard deviation for mathematical developers"
date: 2019-05-16T07:30:03+02:00
draft: true
---

The average and standard deviation come up in all kinds of places, and the
closer we come to applications of math the more useful understanding them
becomes. I got through all of my PhD in differential geometry without really
understanding what they were; after a year of working on distributed systems I'd
needed to sit down and really grok them. This is the way I think about those
concepts and helped me feel like I really understand them. It's very influenced
by my geometry background and may not be for everyone.

The average and standard deviation belong, if not to statistics, then to
probability theory. To be good citizens, we should thus work in a probability
space; that is, a measure space of volume one. That is what we'll do in
practice, but I prefer starting from a slightly more concrete situation and
building up our probability space.

Let thus $X$ be some space. We'll always take $X$ to be a subset of the real
numbers here, and we'll imagine the points of $X$ represent time. If we're
inspired by software engineering, we'll think of $X$ as being a set $X = \{x_1,
\ldots, x_n\}$ of points that are all the same distance apart, as if they were
the time-series resolution of a monitoring system like Graphite or Prometheus.

We're interested in things that happen, and we look at the set $X$ as the set of
points where we're able to measure observations of things that happen. The set
of all events we can observe is thus the set of real-values functions $F(X) = \{
f : X \to \mathbb{R} \}$. This is a real vector space, and if the set $X$ is
finite it is also finite-dimensional. We'll assume we've picked an inner product
on this vector space such that the norm of the constant function 1 is 1. This is
always possible.

This is our setup. Events happen, we can only measure them at certain times, and
we have an inner product to compare events. Think, again, of time-series
monitoring of systems.
